Bringing Long-Tail Data Into the Light

Much of the data generated by science, social science, and the humanities is smaller, unstructured, un-curated and thus not easily shared. Taken together, however, this “long-tail” data, both past and present, represents a vast amount of research data with the potential to greatly impact future research in many areas of study.
	The unstructured, un-curated nature of this data, however, means that once the data is gathered and the research published, the data often never sees the light of day again. In addition, contemporary science relies on digital data and software that evolves and disappears quickly as underlying technology changes. Thus we are entering a period where scientific results are no longer easily reproducible.  Since reproducibility is foundational to scientific discovery, development of a method for easily accessing legacy data and software is essential to maintaining the viability of large bodies of research.

The Super Mutt of Software

Brown Dog seeks to develop a service that will make past and present un-curated data accessible and useful to scientists while also demonstrating the novel science and scholarship that can be conducted from such data.
	Brown Dog will not attempt to construct a single piece of software that magically understands all data, but instead will use every possible source of automatable help already in existence (e.g. software, tools, libraries, other services) in a robust and provenance preserving manner to create a service that can deal with as much of this data as possible. Brown Dog is the proverbial “super mutt” of software, serving as a low-level data infrastructure to interface with digital data content across the web and enabling a new era of science and applications at large. The broader impact of this work is in its potential to serve not just the scientific community but the general public as a “DNS for data”, transforming data on the fly to more accessible forms through a distributed and extensible collection of data manipulation tools, moving civilization towards an era where a user’s access to data is not limited by a file’s format or un-curated collections.
 
Towards a Data Cyberinfrastructure

Brown Dog is part of the DataNet/DIBBs program funded by NSF beginning in 2008. DataNet was conceived to address the increasingly digital and data-intensive nature of science and engineering research and education. Digital data are not only the output of research but provide input to new hypotheses, enabling new scientific insights and driving innovation. Therein lies one of the major challenges of this scientific generation: how to develop the new methods, management structures and technologies to manage the diversity, size, and complexity of current and future data sets and data streams. DataNet addresses that challenge by creating a set of exemplar national and global data research infrastructure organizations (dubbed DataNet Partners) that provide unique opportunities to communities of researchers to advance science and/or engineering research and learning.
	Brown Dog is, more specifically, part of a follow-on effort called DIBBs (Data Infrastructure Building Blocks), focused on building software cyberinfrastructure to support current and foreseen scientific data needs, stuff lots of people can use.  All of the DIBBs projects are meant to provide complementary services, each building on the others capabilities.

